Five, the Zope 3 in Zope 2 project
==================================
       
What is Five?
-------------

Five is a Zope 2 product that allows you to integrate Zope 3
technologies into Zope 2, today.  Among others, it allows you to use
Zope 3 interfaces, ZCML-based configuration, adapters, browser pages
(including skins, layers, and resources), automated add and edit forms
based on schemas, object events, as well as Zope 3-style i18n message
catalogs.

We've tried to keep the Five experience as close to Zope 3 as
possible, so this means that what you learn while using Five should
also be applicable to Zope 3, and viceversa.

Five 1.0 and 1.1 work on a straight Zope 2.7 installation, as long as
Zope 3 has been installed.  Five 1.2 requires Zope 2.8 which already
ships with Zope 3, Five 1.3 is included in Zope 2.9.

We're in the process of evaluating lots more Zope 3 technologies for
integration into Zope 2.  This is the right moment for interested Zope
2 and Zope 3 developers to jump in.  We're looking for cooperation
between different Zope 2 projects so that this can be a foundational
system for us all.

Download
--------

We have released Five 1.2.1 on 25 February 2006.  You may download it
here:

http://codespeak.net/z3/five/release/Five-1.2.1.tgz

We have also released Five 1.3.2.  This is a bugfix release for Five
1.3 and will be included in the next Zope 2.9 bugfix release.  You may
download it here:

http://codespeak.net/z3/five/release/Five-1.3.2.tgz

Joining the project
-------------------

Five is kindly hosted on codespeak.net, and is part of the larger
*Zope 3 Base* project that offers an approachable area for
developers of Zope 3 related software.

Five has a mailing list: 

http://codespeak.net/mailman/listinfo/z3-five

We're also active on IRC, at ``#z3-base`` on freenode.
 
Five is hosted in a subversion repository on codespeak.net. You can
browse this on the web here:

http://codespeak.net/svn/z3/Five/

You can check out Five using the following subversion command::

  svn co svn://svn.zope.org/repos/main/Products.Five/trunk Five

There's also a checkins mailing list for the Z3 project, here:

http://codespeak.net/mailman/listinfo/z3-checkins

If you want checkin access, please join the z3-five mailing list or
the ``#z3-base`` IRC channel, and ask us there.

We hope to hear from you!
