zope.component/tseaver-test_cleanup/docs/api.rst, before:

:mod:`zope.component` API
=========================


Site Manager APIs
-----------------

.. autofunction:: zope.component.getGlobalSiteManager

   The API returns the module-scope global registry:

   .. doctest::

      >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IComponentLookup
      >>> from zope.component.globalregistry import base
      >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
      >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
      >>> gsm is base
      True

   The registry implements the
   :class:`~zope.component.interfaces.IComponentLookup` interface:

   .. doctest::

      >>> IComponentLookup.providedBy(gsm)
      True

   The same registry is returned each time we call the function:

   .. doctest::

      >>> getGlobalSiteManager() is gsm
      True

.. autofunction:: zope.component.getSiteManager(context=None)

   We don't know anything about the default service manager, except that it
   is an `IComponentLookup`.

   .. doctest::

     >>> from zope.component import getSiteManager
     >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IComponentLookup
     >>> IComponentLookup.providedBy(getSiteManager())
     True

   Calling `getSiteManager()` with no args is equivalent to calling it with a
   context of `None`.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager() is getSiteManager(None)
     True

   If the context passed to `getSiteManager()` is not `None`, it is
   adapted to `IComponentLookup` and this adapter returned.  So, we
   create a context that can be adapted to `IComponentLookup` using
   the `__conform__` API.

   Let's create the simplest stub-implementation of a site manager possible:

   .. doctest::

     >>> sitemanager = object()

   Now create a context that knows how to adapt to our newly created site
   manager.

   .. doctest::

     >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests \
     ...    import ConformsToIComponentLookup
     >>> context = ConformsToIComponentLookup(sitemanager)

   Now make sure that the `getSiteManager()` API call returns the correct
   site manager.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager(context) is sitemanager
     True

   Using a context that is not adaptable to `IComponentLookup` should fail.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager(sitemanager)
     Traceback (most recent call last):
     ...
     ComponentLookupError: ('Could not adapt', <instance Ob>,
     <InterfaceClass zope...interfaces.IComponentLookup>)


Utility Registration APIs
-------------------------

Utilities are components that simply provide an interface. They are
instantiated at the time or before they are registered. Here we test the
simple query interface.

Before we register any utility, there is no utility available, of
course. The pure instatiation of an object does not make it a utility. If
you do not specify a default, you get a `ComponentLookupError`.

.. testsetup::

   from zope.component.testing import setUp
   setUp()

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import getUtility
   >>> from zope.component import queryUtility
   >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests import I1
   >>> getUtility(I1) #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError: \
   (<InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.I1>, '')

Otherwise, you get the default:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryUtility(I1, default='<default>')
   '<default>'

Now we declare `ob` to be the utility providing `I1`:

.. doctest::

   >>> ob = object()
   >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
   >>> getGlobalSiteManager().registerUtility(ob, I1)

Now the component is available:

.. doctest::

   >>> getUtility(I1) is ob
   True
   >>> queryUtility(I1) is ob
   True

Named Utilities
###############

Registering a utility without a name does not mean that it is available
when looking for the utility with a name:

.. doctest::

   >>> getUtility(I1, name='foo')
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError:
   (<InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.I1>, 'foo')

   >>> queryUtility(I1, name='foo', default='<default>')
   '<default>'

Registering the utility under the correct name makes it available:

.. doctest::

   >>> getGlobalSiteManager().registerUtility(ob, I1, name='foo')
   >>> getUtility(I1, 'foo') is ob
   True
   >>> queryUtility(I1, 'foo') is ob
   True

Delegated Utility Lookup
########################

It is common for a utility to delegate its answer to a utility
providing the same interface in one of the component registry's
bases. Let's first create a global utility:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.interface import Interface
   >>> from zope.interface import implementer
   >>> class IMyUtility(Interface):
   ...     pass

   >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests \
   ...    import ConformsToIComponentLookup
   >>> @implementer(IMyUtility)
   ... class MyUtility(ConformsToIComponentLookup):
   ...     def __init__(self, id, sm):
   ...         self.id = id
   ...         self.sitemanager = sm
   ...     def __repr__(self):
   ...         return "%s('%s')" % (self.__class__.__name__, self.id)

   >>> gutil = MyUtility('global', gsm)
   >>> gsm.registerUtility(gutil, IMyUtility, 'myutil')

Now, let's create two registries and set up the bases hierarchy:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.interface.registry import Components
   >>> sm1 = Components('sm1', bases=(gsm, ))
   >>> sm1_1 = Components('sm1_1', bases=(sm1, ))

Now we create two utilities and insert them in our folder hierarchy:

.. doctest::

   >>> util1 = MyUtility('one', sm1)
   >>> sm1.registerUtility(util1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   >>> IComponentLookup(util1) is sm1
   True

   >>> util1_1 = MyUtility('one-one', sm1_1)
   >>> sm1_1.registerUtility(util1_1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   >>> IComponentLookup(util1_1) is sm1_1
   True

Now, if we ask `util1_1` for its next available utility we get the
``one`` utility:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import getNextUtility
   >>> getNextUtility(util1_1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('one')

Next we ask `util1` for its next utility and we should get the global version:

.. doctest::

   >>> getNextUtility(util1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('global')

However, if we ask the global utility for the next one, an error is raised

.. doctest::

   >>> getNextUtility(gutil, IMyUtility,
   ...                     'myutil') #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError:
   No more utilities for <InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.IMyUtility>,
   'myutil' have been found.

You can also use `queryNextUtility` and specify a default:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import queryNextUtility
   >>> queryNextUtility(gutil, IMyUtility, 'myutil', 'default')
   'default'

Let's now ensure that the function also works with multiple registries. First
we create another base registry:

.. doctest::

   >>> myregistry = Components()

We now set up another utility into that registry:

.. doctest::

   >>> custom_util = MyUtility('my_custom_util', myregistry)
   >>> myregistry.registerUtility(custom_util, IMyUtility, 'my_custom_util')

We add it as a base to the local site manager:

.. doctest::

   >>> sm1.__bases__ = (myregistry,) + sm1.__bases__

Both the ``myregistry`` and global utilities should be available:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryNextUtility(sm1, IMyUtility, 'my_custom_util')
   MyUtility('my_custom_util')
   >>> queryNextUtility(sm1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('global')

Note, if the context cannot be converted to a site manager, the default is
retruned:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryNextUtility(object(), IMyUtility, 'myutil', 'default')
   'default'

.. testcleanup::

   from zope.component.testing import tearDown
   tearDown()


.. autofunction:: zope.component.getUtility

.. autofunction:: zope.component.queryUtility



:mod:`zope.component.interfaces`
================================

.. automodule:: zope.component.interfaces

   .. autointerface:: IComponentArchitecture
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IRegistry
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IComponentRegistrationConvenience
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IPossibleSite
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: ISite
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autoexception:: Misused

   .. autointerface:: IFactory
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

Commit message:

Document / test 'getUtilitiesFor' API.
git-svn-id: svn://svn.zope.org/repos/main@126905 62d5b8a3-27da-0310-9561-8e5933582275

zope.component/tseaver-test_cleanup/docs/api.rst, after:

:mod:`zope.component` API
=========================


Site Manager APIs
-----------------

.. autofunction:: zope.component.getGlobalSiteManager

   The API returns the module-scope global registry:

   .. doctest::

      >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IComponentLookup
      >>> from zope.component.globalregistry import base
      >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
      >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
      >>> gsm is base
      True

   The registry implements the
   :class:`~zope.component.interfaces.IComponentLookup` interface:

   .. doctest::

      >>> IComponentLookup.providedBy(gsm)
      True

   The same registry is returned each time we call the function:

   .. doctest::

      >>> getGlobalSiteManager() is gsm
      True

.. autofunction:: zope.component.getSiteManager(context=None)

   We don't know anything about the default service manager, except that it
   is an `IComponentLookup`.

   .. doctest::

     >>> from zope.component import getSiteManager
     >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IComponentLookup
     >>> IComponentLookup.providedBy(getSiteManager())
     True

   Calling `getSiteManager()` with no args is equivalent to calling it with a
   context of `None`.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager() is getSiteManager(None)
     True

   If the context passed to `getSiteManager()` is not `None`, it is
   adapted to `IComponentLookup` and this adapter returned.  So, we
   create a context that can be adapted to `IComponentLookup` using
   the `__conform__` API.

   Let's create the simplest stub-implementation of a site manager possible:

   .. doctest::

     >>> sitemanager = object()

   Now create a context that knows how to adapt to our newly created site
   manager.

   .. doctest::

     >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests \
     ...    import ConformsToIComponentLookup
     >>> context = ConformsToIComponentLookup(sitemanager)

   Now make sure that the `getSiteManager()` API call returns the correct
   site manager.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager(context) is sitemanager
     True

   Using a context that is not adaptable to `IComponentLookup` should fail.

   .. doctest::

     >>> getSiteManager(sitemanager)
     Traceback (most recent call last):
     ...
     ComponentLookupError: ('Could not adapt', <instance Ob>,
     <InterfaceClass zope...interfaces.IComponentLookup>)


Utility Registration APIs
-------------------------

Utilities are components that simply provide an interface. They are
instantiated at the time or before they are registered. Here we test the
simple query interface.

Before we register any utility, there is no utility available, of
course. The pure instatiation of an object does not make it a utility. If
you do not specify a default, you get a `ComponentLookupError`.

.. testsetup::

   from zope.component.testing import setUp
   setUp()

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import getUtility
   >>> from zope.component import queryUtility
   >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests import I1
   >>> getUtility(I1) #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError: \
   (<InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.I1>, '')

Otherwise, you get the default:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryUtility(I1, default='<default>')
   '<default>'

Now we declare `ob` to be the utility providing `I1`:

.. doctest::

   >>> ob = object()
   >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
   >>> getGlobalSiteManager().registerUtility(ob, I1)

Now the component is available:

.. doctest::

   >>> getUtility(I1) is ob
   True
   >>> queryUtility(I1) is ob
   True

Named Utilities
###############

Registering a utility without a name does not mean that it is available
when looking for the utility with a name:

.. doctest::

   >>> getUtility(I1, name='foo')
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError:
   (<InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.I1>, 'foo')

   >>> queryUtility(I1, name='foo', default='<default>')
   '<default>'

Registering the utility under the correct name makes it available:

.. doctest::

   >>> ob2 = object()
   >>> getGlobalSiteManager().registerUtility(ob2, I1, name='foo')
   >>> getUtility(I1, 'foo') is ob2
   True
   >>> queryUtility(I1, 'foo') is ob2
   True

Querying Multiple Utilities
###########################

Sometimes it may be useful to query all utilities, both anonymous and named
for a given interface.  The :function:`~zope.component.getUtilitiesFor` API
returns a sequence of ``(name, utility)`` tuples, where ``name`` is the
empty string for the anonymous utility:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import getUtilitiesFor
   >>> tuples = list(getUtilitiesFor(I1))
   >>> len(tuples)
   2
   >>> ('', ob) in tuples
   True
   >>> ('foo', ob2) in tuples
   True

Delegated Utility Lookup
########################

It is common for a utility to delegate its answer to a utility
providing the same interface in one of the component registry's
bases. Let's first create a global utility:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.interface import Interface
   >>> from zope.interface import implementer
   >>> class IMyUtility(Interface):
   ...     pass

   >>> from zope.component.tests.test_doctests \
   ...    import ConformsToIComponentLookup
   >>> @implementer(IMyUtility)
   ... class MyUtility(ConformsToIComponentLookup):
   ...     def __init__(self, id, sm):
   ...         self.id = id
   ...         self.sitemanager = sm
   ...     def __repr__(self):
   ...         return "%s('%s')" % (self.__class__.__name__, self.id)

   >>> gutil = MyUtility('global', gsm)
   >>> gsm.registerUtility(gutil, IMyUtility, 'myutil')

Now, let's create two registries and set up the bases hierarchy:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.interface.registry import Components
   >>> sm1 = Components('sm1', bases=(gsm, ))
   >>> sm1_1 = Components('sm1_1', bases=(sm1, ))

Now we create two utilities and insert them in our folder hierarchy:

.. doctest::

   >>> util1 = MyUtility('one', sm1)
   >>> sm1.registerUtility(util1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   >>> IComponentLookup(util1) is sm1
   True

   >>> util1_1 = MyUtility('one-one', sm1_1)
   >>> sm1_1.registerUtility(util1_1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   >>> IComponentLookup(util1_1) is sm1_1
   True

Now, if we ask `util1_1` for its next available utility we get the
``one`` utility:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import getNextUtility
   >>> getNextUtility(util1_1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('one')

Next we ask `util1` for its next utility and we should get the global version:

.. doctest::

   >>> getNextUtility(util1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('global')

However, if we ask the global utility for the next one, an error is raised

.. doctest::

   >>> getNextUtility(gutil, IMyUtility,
   ...                     'myutil') #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   ComponentLookupError:
   No more utilities for <InterfaceClass zope.component.tests.test_doctests.IMyUtility>,
   'myutil' have been found.

You can also use `queryNextUtility` and specify a default:

.. doctest::

   >>> from zope.component import queryNextUtility
   >>> queryNextUtility(gutil, IMyUtility, 'myutil', 'default')
   'default'

Let's now ensure that the function also works with multiple registries. First
we create another base registry:

.. doctest::

   >>> myregistry = Components()

We now set up another utility into that registry:

.. doctest::

   >>> custom_util = MyUtility('my_custom_util', myregistry)
   >>> myregistry.registerUtility(custom_util, IMyUtility, 'my_custom_util')

We add it as a base to the local site manager:

.. doctest::

   >>> sm1.__bases__ = (myregistry,) + sm1.__bases__

Both the ``myregistry`` and global utilities should be available:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryNextUtility(sm1, IMyUtility, 'my_custom_util')
   MyUtility('my_custom_util')
   >>> queryNextUtility(sm1, IMyUtility, 'myutil')
   MyUtility('global')

Note, if the context cannot be converted to a site manager, the default is
retruned:

.. doctest::

   >>> queryNextUtility(object(), IMyUtility, 'myutil', 'default')
   'default'

.. testcleanup::

   from zope.component.testing import tearDown
   tearDown()


.. autofunction:: zope.component.getUtility

.. autofunction:: zope.component.queryUtility



:mod:`zope.component.interfaces`
================================

.. automodule:: zope.component.interfaces

   .. autointerface:: IComponentArchitecture
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IRegistry
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IComponentRegistrationConvenience
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: IPossibleSite
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autointerface:: ISite
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource

   .. autoexception:: Misused

   .. autointerface:: IFactory
      :members:
      :member-order: bysource
