==========
2010-07-06
==========

This is the agenda and summary for the weekly Zope developer meeting of
Tuesday, 2010-07-06 on #zope@irc.freenode.org from 15:00 to 15:30 UTC.

Summary
=======

The IRC log is available here:
    http://zope3.pov.lt/irclogs-zope/%23zope.2010-07-06.log.html#t2010-07-06T18:00:42

Attendees
---------

Tres Seaver, Adam Groszer, Hanno Schlichting, Charlie Clark, Wichert
Akkermann, Jens Vagelpohl, d2m, davisagli

VCS properties
--------------

In a recent discussion on the CMF mailinglist the question was raised what our
ruleso n using VCS properties (especially $Id$) are.

The discussion traced the origin back to CVS and generally argued that the
need for the IDs does not exist anymore but actually obstruct diffs in SVN.
The suggestion was to change the policy to ask for not adding properties in
the future anymore and opportunistically remove IDs whenever we stumble over
them.

A poll showed 7 people in favor of this action, none against it.  Tres updated
the ZTK documentation to reflect the decision.


Expectations for the summit
---------------------------

We had a round of people expressing what interest and expectations they have
on topics that we might deal with at the summit. Here's the assorted list of
topics that came up:

- more compelling stories for Zope
- better documentation
- developer portraits/company profiles/product use-cases on zope.org
- opening up for experimentation and then folding together common experiences
  into common code (like HTML 5)
- higher quality code versus more code
- actively find and describe use cases

Optional C-optimisations
------------------------

Some projects (like i18nmessageid) have optional C-code and in general would
work on Non-CPython-platforms (GAE, Jython, IronPython, Windows) if the build
process would support it. Unfortunately neither setuptools nor distributes
helps with spelling optional extensions, thus Tres started working on
zope.optionalextension which is intended to work together with bare distutils,
setuptools and distribute.

Meta
----

Today we had a surprising large number of participants, compared to previous
weeks with only the same three people.

A member from US West Coast reported that he has a hard time joining at the
current time the meeting takes place at.

Hanno pointed out that we might want to take some topics explicitly to the
mailing list if attendance is low and topics need to be driven forward.
Charlie pointed out that to get to decisions real-time meetings (like IRC) may
be more productive. There was no conclusion on the issue and Hanno withdrew
his suggestion.

Christian Theune asked for input about managing ongoing issues, but no ideas
came up.


Agenda
======

- Use of $Id$ properties in code (keep, remove active, remove
  opportunistically)
  See https://mail.zope.org/pipermail/zope-cmf/2010-July/029208.html

- Expectations for the upcoming Zope summit?

- Meta
    - Review meeting itself, maybe add extra 15 minutes for "meta" once a
      month or every two months? (postponed until 2010-06-01)
    - How to organize open issues in the long run (Blueprints?
      Other tool? Continue text files?)

Ongoing issues
--------------

Those issues are currently ongoing. We don't have to discuss them. We just
need to follow up on them eventually.

- ZTK status
    - Towards a ZTK release
        - Documentation
        - Release scope

- Test runners / nightly builds
    - Windows
        - Compiler licenses (Tres, postponed until after 2010-06-14)
        - Win egg builder (Adam)
        - Documentation about VM setup (Adam)
    - Supporting Python 2.7
        - Needs help from the buildbots

- Documentation
    - Consolidate "floating" documentation into Sphinx/docs.zope.org
        - write blueprint for the consolidation effort (Theuni)
        - Find candidate links and gather them centrally
        - Edit/update the documentation from the link list and
          land in Sphinx-style during a sprint
    - Turn ZTK package documentation into sphinx style (like zope.event)
        - write bug and assign to toolkit projects (Theuni)
    - Provide package documentation under docs.zope.org/<packagename> and keep
      updated based on the projects' trunks. (Jens)

- Releases
    - How to find a good point when to cut a new release for a package for
      which fixed bugs where registered (or changes have been made)? Any
      automation possible to alert us when changes have been sitting around
      unreleased for a while?

Topic proposals
---------------

- Chris McDonough: Pondering *some* (re-)structuring of the ZTK to allow for
  better maintenance/release management/communication/marketing. 

- Christian Theune: I'd like us to ponder how we can (in addition to the
  housekeeping and cleanups we do) also move to do constructive work together
  to expand the stuff that Zope packages (ZTK) is about. How do we go about
  implementing new technologies together, like supporting HTML 5 in the
  various parts? I'd like to start putting in new code in the foreseeable
  future in the zope.* namespace.
