==========
2010-05-18
==========

This is the agenda and summary for the weekly Zope developer meeting of
Tuesday, 2010-05-18 on #zope@irc.freenode.org from 15:00 to 15:30 UTC.

Agenda
======

- Windows builds
    - AMI (Sidnei, Adam)
    - Compiler licenses (Tres)
    - Amazon funding (Adam, Christian Theune)

- Bug tracking
    - Monitoring tracker status (Charlie Clark, ctheune)

- Preparing for Bugday 2010-05-19


Ongoing issues
--------------

Those issues are currently ongoing. We don't have to discuss them. We just
need to follow up on them eventually.

- KGS 3.4.1 release
    - Document release procedure (Adam)
    - Index view for download.zope.org

- ZTK status
    - Towards a ZTK release
        - Documentation
        - Release scope

- Test runners / nightly builds
      - Windows machines

- Meta
    - How to organize open issues in the long run (Blueprints?
      Other tool? Continue text files?)
    - Find second person to run the weekly meetings


Topic proposals
---------------

- Lennart: Of course what applies to Hanno should apply to others making
  releases of packages maintained by the Zope Toolkit project as well. I think
  the ZTK leadership should figure out some kind of guidelines for this that
  people can follow.

- Chris McDonough: Pondering *some* (re-)structuring of the ZTK to allow for
  better maintenance/release management/communication/marketing. 

- Christian Theune: I'd like us to ponder how we can (in addition to the
  housekeeping and cleanups we do) also move to do constructive work together
  to expand the stuff that Zope packages (ZTK) is about. How do we go about
  implementing new technologies together, like supporting HTML 5 in the
  various parts? I'd like to start putting in new code in the foreseeable
  future in the zope.* namespace.

Summary
=======

The IRC log is available here:
http://zope3.pov.lt

XXX will be filled in after the meeting.
