Introduction
============

BlueBream is web framework written in Python programming language.
BlueBream is a thin layer on top of Zope Tool Kit (ZTK).  Normally,
BlueBream applications are developed using a Python based build
system called Buildout.  BlueBream is built on top of a component
architecture to separate presentation code from the problem domain
code and to create reusable components (zope.component).  BlueBream
has an object publisher (zope.publisher), web server (zope.server),
transactional object database (ZODB), XML-configuration language for
registering components (zope.configuration), flexible security
architecture with pluggable security policies (zope.security), unit
and functional testing frameworks (zope.testing, zope.testbrowser),
XHTML-compliant templating language (zope.pagetemplate), schema
engine and automatic form generation machinery (zope.schema,
z3c.form) and many more core and third-party packages.

Previously BlueBream was known as "Zope 3".  The development of this
project started in 2002.  BlueBream is a ZPL (BSD like, GPL
compatible license) licensed free/open source software.  It was
developed by the Zope community with the leadership of Jim Fulton.  A
brief history is given in the next section.

The main aim of this book is to create a free online book about
BlueBream.  This book will cover how to develop web applications
using BlueBream components. You suggestions and edits are always
welcome.
