=============
Five features
=============

Five features are mostly Zope 3 features, though Five has some extras,
and some limitations.

Zope 3 interfaces
=================

Everything in the ``zope.interface`` package should work. Zope 3
interfaces are the foundation of the component architecture, and also
the foundation of schemas.

ZCML
====

ZCML is the Zope Configuration Markup Language, an XML application.
Zope 3 (and Five) code consists of a lot of components that can be
plugged together using ZCML.

If you put a ``site.zcml`` in the home directory of your Zope
instance, this is the root of the ZCML tree. An example of
``site.zcml`` is in ``site.zcml.in``. If you don't place a
``site.zcml``, Five falls back on ``fallback.zcml``.

ZCML in Five has special directive, ``five:loadProducts``, to load the
ZCML (``meta.zcml``, ``configure.zcml``) of all installed Zope 2
products, if available.

Another special directive, ``five:loadProductsOverrides`` is available
to load any overriding ZCML (``override.zcml``) in these products. In
the ``override.zcml`` you can override existing views or adapters, in
this or in other products.

Adapters
========

You can use adapters in Five, just like in Zope 3.

Zope 3 views
============

Zope 3 views work in Five, including layers and skins, though there
are some limitations:

* You need to make a Zope 2 class "viewable". This can be done by
  mixing in ``Products.Five.api.Viewable`` into your class, or
  alternatively, using the ``five:viewable`` directive in ZCML.

* At the the time of writing, special constructs using ``@@`` or
``++`` do not yet work in URLs. Views with subviews also do not work.

You can use ``five:viewable`` on any Zope 2 class, unless it declares
its own ``__bobo_traverse__``. We plan to lift the ``bobo_traverse``
restriction soon.

At the time of writing there is also no provision for default views in
Five.

Zope 3 page templates
=====================

The Zope 3 page template engine mostly works at the time of this
writing, and is automatically used if you use the ``template``
attribute to the ``browser:page`` directive.

One thing to be aware of is that the page template engine runs
completely in trusted mode, just like Python code. That is, as soon as
the page template engine is running, no Zope 2 or Zope 3 security
checks are made.

Security declarations
=====================

Five aims to eradicate ``declareProtected``, ``ClassSecurityInfo`` and
``initializeClass`` from your Zope 2 code.

In order to do this, Five provides the Zope 3 way of declaring
permissions from ZCML, but uses the Zope 2 mechanisms to actually set
them. To declare permissions for methods and templates on views you
use the ``permission`` attribute on the ``browser:page`` directive,
and specify a Zope 2 permission (given a Zope 3 name). You can find a
list of these permissions in ``permissions.zcml`` in Five. The
permission check takes place before the view is executed.

The ``content`` directive can also be used to declare permissions on
Zope 2 content classes. Note however that these permissions will be
ignored by views anyway, as they are trusted -- it only serves to
protect directly exposed methods on content classes (the python
scripts and the ZPublisher).

