Browser Resources
=================


Introduction
------------

Certain presentation, like images and style sheets are not associated
with any other component, so that one cannot create a view.  To solve
this problem, resources were developed, which are presentation
components that do not require any context.  This mini-chapter will
demonstrate how resources are created and registered with Zope 3.

File Resource
-------------

The first goal is to register a simple plain-text file called
`resource.txt` as a browser resource.  The first step is to create
this file anywhere you wish on the filesystem, and adding the
following content::

  Hello, I am a Zope 3 Resource Component!

Then, register the resource in a ZCML configuration file using the
`browser` resource directive::

  <browser:resource
    name="resource.txt"
    file="resource.txt"
    layer="default"
    />

Line 2: This is the name under which the resource will be known in
Zope.

Line 3: The file attribute specifies the path to the resource on the
filessytem.  The current working directory ('.') is always the
directory the configuration file is located.  So in the example
above, the file `resource.txt` is located in the same folder as the
configuration file is.

Line 4: The optional layer attribute specifies the layer the resource
is added to.  By default, the default layer is selected.

Once you hook up the configuration file to the main configuration
path and restart Zope 3, you should be able to access the resource
now via a Browser using `http://localhost:8080/@@/resource.txt`.  The
`@@/` in the URL tells the traversal mechanism that the following
object is a resource.


Image resource
--------------

If you have an image resource, you might want to use different
configuration.  Create a simple image called img.png and register it
as follows::

  <browser:resource
    name="img.png"
    image="img.png"
    permission="zope.ManageContent"
    />

Line 3: As you can see, instead of the `file` attribute we use the
`image` one.  Internally this will create an `Image` object, which is
able to detect the content type and returns it correctly.  There is a
third possible attribute named `template`.  If specified, a Page
Template that is executed when the resource is called.  Note that
only one of `file`, `image`, or `template` attributes can be
specified inside a resource directive.

Line 4: A final optional attribute is the ''permission'' one must
have to view the resource.  To demonstrate the security, I set the
permission required for viewing the image to `zope.ManageContent`, so
that you must log in as an administrator/- manager to be able to view
it.  The default of the attribute is `zope.Public` so that everyone
can see the resource.


Directory resource
------------------

If you have many resource files to register, it can be very tedious
to write a single directive for every resource.  For this purpose the
`resourceDirectory` is provided, with which you can simply declare an
entire directory, including its content as resources.  Thereby the
filenames of the files are reused as the names for the resource
available.  Assuming you put your two previous resources in a
directory called resource, then you can use the following::

  <browser:resourceDirectory
    name="resources"
    directory="../resource"
    />

The image will then be publically available under the URL:
`http://localhost:8080/@@/resources/img.png`

The `DirectoryResource` object uses a simple resource type
recognition.  It looks at the filename extensions to discover the
type.  For page templates, currently the extensions ''pt'', ''zpt''
and ''html'' are registered and for an image ''gif'', ''png'' and
''jpg''.  All other extensions are converted to file resources.  Note
that it is not necessary to have a list of all image types, since
only Browser-displayable images must be recognized.


ZRT resource
------------

When working locally, you may be storing your image resources in a
directory.  If you have a subfolder called `images` with an image
`logo.png`.  And you have a template, so here is the HTML to insert
the logo::

  <img src="./images/logo.png" />

Now you can see that the template locally works.

If you view the HTML via Zope, you can see that it is broken.

Now, let's try to register the logo with the system like this::

  <resource
    name="logo.png"
    file="images/logo.png"
    />

Now try again, after restarting Zope 3, you can see that it is still
broken!.  So, relative path is not correct.

Zope Resource Templates (ZRT) allows for locally working resources to
work with Zope 3 as well.  It will rewrite text segments in a
resource.  It is a 3rd party package developed by Stephan Richter for
Lovely Systems.  The package is available from here:
`http://pypi.python.org/pypi/z3c.zrtresource`

To use the zrt-resource add the following lines to the page
template::

  <!--
    /* zrt-replace: "./images/logo.png" \
                    tal"string:${context/++resource++logo.png}" */
  -->

Then convert HTML resource registration to::

  <zrt-resource
    name="helloworld.html"
    file="helloworld.html"
    />


Summary
-------

This chapter introduced browser resources and narrated its usage.
