Content Component
=================

.. warning::

   This documentation is under construction.  See the `Documentation
   Status <http://wiki.zope.org/bluebream/DocumentationStatus>`_ page
   in wiki for the current status and timeline.

Introduction
------------

See this example::

  >>> from zope import interface

  >>> class IPerson(interface.Interface):
  ...     name = interface.Attribute("Name")
  >>> class Person(object):
  ...     interface.implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = None
  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"

Here `jack` is a content component.  So a content component is nothing but an
object which provides a particular interface.  As said in the previous chapter,
use ``zope.schema`` to define fields of interface.  The above interface can be
declared like this::

  >>> from zope import interface
  >>> from zope import schema

  >>> class IPerson(interface.Interface):
  ...     name = schema.TextLine(
  ...         title=u"Name",
  ...         description=u"Name of person",
  ...         default=u"",
  ...         required=True)

If you are developing an enterprise application content will be the most
important thing you have to organize first.  To learn Zope 3 application
development with content components, this chapter introduce a simple
ticket/issue collector application.

First look at the user stories, this book will implement these stories in
coming chapters.

  1. Individual small ticket collector for each project.  Many collectors can
     be added to one running zope.

  2. Any number of tickets can be added to one collector.

  3. Each ticket will be added with a description and one initial comment.

  4. Additional comments can be added to tickets.

This chapter starts a simple implementation of ticket collector.

As stated above, our goal is to develop a fully functional, though not
great-looking, web-based ticket collector application.  The root object will be
the ``Collector``, which can contain ``Ticket`` objects from various users.
Since you want to allow people to respond to various tickets, you have to allow
tickets to contain replies, which are ``Comment`` objects.

That means you have two container-based components: The ``Collector`` contains
only tickets and can be added to any Folder or container that wishes to be able
to contain it.  To make the ticket collector more interesting, it also has a
description, which briefly introduces the subject/theme of the discussions
hosted.  ``Tickets``, on the other hand should be only contained by ticket
collector.  They will each have a summary and a description.  And last
``Comment`` should be only contained by tickets.

This setup should contain all the essential things that you need to make the
object usable.  Later on you will associate a lot of other meta-data with these
components to integrate them even better into Zope 3 and add additional
functionality.

The most convenient place to put your package is ``$HOME/myzope/lib/python``.
To create that package, add a directory using::

  $ cd $HOME/myzope/lib/python/
  $ mkdir collector

on GNU/Linux.

To make this directory a package, place an empty __init__.py file in the new
directory.  In GNU/Linux you can do something like::

  $ echo "# Make it a Python package" >> collector/__init__.py

but you can of course also just use a text editor and save a file of this name.
Just make sure that there is valid Python code in the file.  The file should at
least contain some whitespace, since empty files confuse some archive programs.

From now on you are only going to work inside this ``collector`` package, which
should be located at ``$HOME/myzope/lib/python/collector``.

.. raw:: html

  <div id="disqus_thread"></div><script type="text/javascript"
  src="http://disqus.com/forums/bluebream/embed.js"></script><noscript><a
  href="http://disqus.com/forums/bluebream/?url=ref">View the
  discussion thread.</a></noscript><a href="http://disqus.com"
  class="dsq-brlink">blog comments powered by <span
  class="logo-disqus">Disqus</span></a>
